Subpart A—General Provisions

§ 2635.101 Basic obligation of public service.
(a) Public service is a public trust. Each employee has a responsibility to the United States Government and its citizens to place loyalty to the Constitution, laws, and ethical principles above private gain. To ensure that every citizen can have complete confidence in the integrity of the Federal Government, each employee must respect and adhere to the principles of ethical conduct set forth in this section, as well as the implementing standards contained in this part and in supplemental agency regulations.
(b) General principles. The following general principles apply to every employee and may form the basis for the standards contained in this part. When a situation is not covered by the standards set forth in this part, employees must apply the principles set forth in this section in determining whether their conduct is proper.
(1) Public service is a public trust, requiring employees to place loyalty to the Constitution, the laws, and ethical principles above private gain.
(2) Employees shall not hold financial interests that conflict with the conscientious performance of duty.
(3) Employees shall not engage in financial transactions using nonpublic Government information or allow the improper use of such information to further any private interest.
(4) An employee shall not, except as permitted by subpart B of this part, solicit or accept any gift or other item of monetary value from any person or entity seeking official action from, doing business with, or conducting activities regulated by the employee's agency, or whose interests may be substantially affected by the performance or nonperformance of the employee's duties.
(5) Employees shall put forth honest effort in the performance of their duties.
(6) Employees shall not knowingly make unauthorized commitments or promises of any kind purporting to bind the Government.
(7) Employees shall not use public office for private gain.
(8) Employees shall act impartially and not give preferential treatment to any private organization or individual.
(9) Employees shall protect and conserve Federal property and shall not use it for other than authorized activities.
(10) Employees shall not engage in outside employment or activities, including seeking or negotiating for employment, that conflict with official Government duties and responsibilities.
(11) Employees shall disclose waste, fraud, abuse, and corruption to appropriate authorities.
(12) Employees shall satisfy in good faith their obligations as citizens, including all just financial obligations, especially those—such as Federal, State, or local taxes—that are imposed by law.
(13) Employees shall adhere to all laws and regulations that provide equal opportunity for all Americans regardless of, for example, race, color, religion, sex (including pregnancy, gender identity, and sexual orientation), national origin, age, genetic information, or disability.
(14) Employees shall endeavor to avoid any actions creating the appearance that they are violating the law or the ethical standards set forth in this part. Whether particular circumstances create an appearance that the law or these standards have been violated shall be determined from the perspective of a reasonable person with knowledge of the relevant facts.
(c) Related statutes. In addition to the standards of ethical conduct set forth in this part, there are conflict of interest statutes that prohibit certain conduct. Criminal conflict of interest statutes of general applicability to all employees, 18 U.S.C. 201, 203, 205, 208, and 209, are summarized in the appropriate subparts of this part and must be taken into consideration in determining whether conduct is proper. Citations to other generally applicable statutes relating to employee conduct are set forth in subpart I of this part, and employees are further cautioned that there may be additional statutory and regulatory restrictions applicable to them generally or as employees of their specific agencies. Because an employee is considered to be on notice of the requirements of any statute, an employee should not rely upon any description or synopsis of a statutory restriction, but should refer to the statute itself and obtain the advice of an agency ethics official as needed.

§ 2635.102 Definitions.
The definitions listed in this section are used throughout this part. Additional definitions appear in the subparts or sections of subparts to which they apply. For purposes of this part:
(a) Agency means an executive agency as defined in 5 U.S.C. 105 and the Postal Service and the Postal Regulatory Commission. It does not include the Government Accountability Office or the government of the District of Columbia.
(b) Agency designee refers to any employee who, by agency regulation, instruction, or other issuance, has been delegated authority to make any determination, give any approval, or take any other action required or permitted by this part with respect to another employee. An agency may delegate these authorities to any number of agency designees necessary to ensure that determinations are made, approvals are given, and other actions are taken in a timely and responsible manner. Any provision that requires a determination, approval, or other action by the agency designee will, when the conduct in issue is that of the head of the agency, be deemed to require that such determination, approval, or action be made or taken by the head of the agency in consultation with the designated agency ethics official.
(c) Agency ethics official refers to the designated agency ethics official, the alternate designated agency ethics official, any deputy ethics official, and any additional ethics official who has been delegated authority to assist in carrying out the responsibilities of an agency's ethics program. The responsibilities of agency ethics officials are described in § 2638.104 of this chapter.
(d) Agency programs or operations refers to any program or function carried out or performed by an agency, whether pursuant to statute, Executive order, or regulation.
(e) Corrective action includes any action necessary to remedy a past violation or prevent a continuing violation of this part, including but not limited to restitution, change of assignment, recusal, divestiture, termination of an activity, waiver, the creation of a qualified diversified or blind trust, or counseling.
(f) Designated agency ethics official refers to the official designated under § 2638.104(a) of this chapter.
(g) Disciplinary action includes those disciplinary actions referred to in Office of Personnel Management regulations at 5 CFR chapter I and instructions implementing provisions of title 5 of the United States Code or provided for in comparable provisions applicable to employees not subject to title 5, including but not limited to reprimand, suspension, demotion, and removal. In the case of a military officer, comparable provisions may include those in the Uniform Code of Military Justice.
(h) Employee means any officer or employee of an agency, including a special Government employee. It includes officers but not enlisted members of the uniformed services. It includes employees of a State or local government or other organization who are serving on detail to an agency, pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 3371, et seq. For purposes other than subparts B and C of this part, it does not include the President or Vice President. Status as an employee is unaffected by pay or leave status or, in the case of a special Government employee, by the fact that the individual does not perform official duties on a given day.
(i) Head of an agency means, in the case of an agency headed by more than one person, the chair or comparable member of such agency.
(j) Person means an individual, corporation and subsidiaries it controls, company, association, firm, partnership, society, joint stock company, or any other organization or institution, including any officer, employee, or agent of such person or entity. For purposes of this part, a corporation will be deemed to control a subsidiary if it owns 50 percent or more of the subsidiary's voting securities. The term is all-inclusive and applies to commercial ventures and nonprofit organizations as well as to foreign, State, and local governments, including the government of the District of Columbia. It does not include any agency or other entity of the Federal Government or any officer or employee thereof when acting in an official capacity on behalf of that agency or entity.
(k) Special Government employee means those executive branch officers or employees specified in 18 U.S.C. 202(a). A special Government employee is retained, designated, appointed, or employed to perform temporary duties either on a full-time or intermittent basis, with or without compensation, for a period not to exceed 130 days during any consecutive 365-day period.
(l) Supplemental agency regulation means a regulation issued pursuant to § 2635.105.

§ 2635.103 Applicability to enlisted members of the uniformed services.
The provisions of this part are not applicable to enlisted members of the uniformed services. However, each agency with jurisdiction over enlisted members of the uniformed services may issue regulations defining the ethical conduct obligations of enlisted members under its jurisdiction. Such regulations or policies, if issued, should be consistent with Executive Order 12674, April 12, 1989, as modified, and may prescribe the full range of statutory and regulatory sanctions, including those available under the Uniform Code of Military Justice, for failure to comply with such regulations.

§ 2635.104 Applicability to employees on detail.
(a) Details to other agencies. Except as provided in paragraph (d) of this section, employees on detail, including uniformed officers on assignment, from their employing agencies to another agency for a period in excess of 30 calendar days will be subject to any supplemental agency regulations of the agency to which they are detailed rather than to any supplemental agency regulations of their employing agencies.
(b) Details to the legislative or judicial branch. Employees on detail, including uniformed officers on assignment, from their employing agencies to the legislative or judicial branch for a period in excess of 30 calendar days will be subject to the ethical standards of the branch or entity to which detailed. For the duration of any such detail or assignment, employees will not be subject to the provisions of this part, except this section, or, except as provided in paragraph (d) of this section, to any supplemental agency regulations of their employing agencies, but will remain subject to the conflict of interest prohibitions in title 18 of the United States Code.
(c) Details to non-Federal entities. Except to the extent exempted in writing pursuant to this paragraph (c), an employee detailed to a non-Federal entity remains subject to this part and to any supplemental agency regulation of their employing agency. When an employee is detailed pursuant to statutory authority to an international organization or to a State or local government for a period in excess of six months, the designated agency ethics official may grant a written exemption from subpart B of this part based on their determination that the entity has adopted written ethical standards covering solicitation and acceptance of gifts which will apply to the employee during the detail and which will be appropriate given the purpose of the detail.
(d) Applicability of special agency statutes. Notwithstanding paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section, employees who are subject to an agency statute which restricts their activities or financial holdings specifically because of their status as an employee of that agency will continue to be subject to any provisions in the supplemental agency regulations of the employing agency that implement that statute.

§ 2635.105 Supplemental agency regulations.
In addition to the regulations set forth in this part, employees must comply with any supplemental agency regulations issued by their employing agencies under this section.
(a) An agency that wishes to supplement this part must prepare and submit to the Office of Government Ethics, for its concurrence and joint issuance, any agency regulations that supplement the regulations contained in this part. Supplemental agency regulations which the agency determines are necessary and appropriate, in view of its programs and operations, to fulfill the purposes of this part must be:
(1) In the form of a supplement to the regulations in this part; and
(2) In addition to the substantive provisions of this part.
(b) After concurrence and co-signature by the Office of Government Ethics, the agency must submit its supplemental agency regulations to the Federal Register for publication and codification at the expense of the agency in this title. Supplemental agency regulations issued under this section are effective only after concurrence and co-signature by the Office of Government Ethics and publication in the Federal Register.
(c) This section applies to any supplemental agency regulations or amendments thereof issued under this part. It does not apply to:
(1) A handbook or other issuance intended merely as an explanation of the standards contained in this part or in supplemental agency regulations;
(2) An instruction or other issuance the purpose of which is to:
(i) Delegate to an agency designee authority to make any determination, give any approval or take any other action required or permitted by this part or by supplemental agency regulations; or
(ii) Establish internal agency procedures for documenting or processing any determination, approval or other action required or permitted by this part or by supplemental agency regulations, or for retaining any such documentation; or
(3) Regulations or instructions that an agency has authority, independent of this part, to issue, such as regulations implementing an agency's gift acceptance statute, protecting categories of nonpublic information, or establishing standards for use of Government vehicles.
(d) Employees of a State or local government or other organization who are serving on detail to an agency, pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 3371, et seq., are subject to any requirements, in addition to those in this part, established by a supplemental agency regulation issued under this section to the extent that such regulation expressly provides.

§ 2635.106 Disciplinary and corrective action.
(a) Except as provided in § 2635.107, a violation of this part or of supplemental agency regulations may be cause for appropriate corrective or disciplinary action to be taken under applicable Governmentwide regulations or agency procedures. Such action may be in addition to any action or penalty prescribed by law.
(b) It is the responsibility of the employing agency to initiate appropriate disciplinary or corrective action in individual cases. However, corrective action may be ordered or disciplinary action recommended by the Director of the Office of Government Ethics under the procedures at part 2638 of this chapter.
(c) A violation of this part or of supplemental agency regulations, as such, does not create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law by any person against the United States, its agencies, its officers or employees, or any other person. Thus, for example, an individual who alleges that an employee has failed to adhere to laws and regulations that provide equal opportunity regardless of race, color, religion, sex (including pregnancy, gender identity, and sexual orientation), national origin, age, genetic information, or disability is required to follow applicable statutory and regulatory procedures, including those of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission.

§ 2635.107 Ethics advice.
(a) As required by § 2638.104(a) and (d) of this chapter, each agency has a designated agency ethics official and an alternate designated agency ethics official; these are the employees who have the primary responsibility for directing the daily activities of an agency's ethics program. Acting directly or through other officials, the designated agency ethics official is responsible for providing ethics advice and counseling regarding the application of this part.
(b) Employees who have questions about the application of this part or any supplemental agency regulations to particular situations should seek advice from an agency ethics official. Disciplinary action for violating this part or any supplemental agency regulations will not be taken against an employee who has engaged in conduct in good faith reliance upon the advice of an agency ethics official, provided that the employee, in seeking such advice, has made full disclosure of all relevant circumstances. When the employee's conduct violates a criminal statute, reliance on the advice of an agency ethics official cannot ensure that the employee will not be prosecuted under that statute. However, good faith reliance on the advice of an agency ethics official is a factor that may be taken into account by the Department of Justice in the selection of cases for prosecution. Disclosures made by an employee to an agency ethics official are not protected by an attorney-client privilege. Agency ethics officials are required by 28 U.S.C. 535 to report any information they receive relating to a violation of the criminal code, title 18 of the United States Code.
